planning principles as professionals and at the
same time protecting our own jobs but we find that
using the language ultimate is workable and
acceptable and now although we haven't got an
ultimate plan approved and I'm not sure if it's
really necessary to approve it because we seem to
be working with it well with other departments we
are backtracking from that point since we've sold
the idea of an ultimate development We're
backtracking to going through some, developing
some land use consumption rates or some growth
rates. And what we're coming in and we're saying,
and this is what we're doing right now, and it's
what your interns will be working on this, my
interns that goes, you know, you teach at school,
we're working on this summer. We're doing land use
consumption rates at A&M. Consumption rates,
uh-huh. We're doing land use consumption rates.
And what we're trying to do, we're going to impose
some five-year timetables on when these uh...
certain types of developments will occur based on
the information that we have available you know
including you know marketability of the land yeah
based on assumptions of continued growth rates
and so forth exactly and we think by using this
approach that we may finally be able to sell
through coming through sort of the back door
approach a comprehensive plan for the city the
city is becoming very cognizant of need of a need to
have some sort of idea of what's going to happen
particularly with regard to our utilities and our
transportation system and it's it's so obvious
that
we're not getting the resistance to be used to to
that kind of
give you a better, even a better perspective of how
we manage our planning. And it's still true today
that we use the tool of a transportation plan to
push most of our programs through, or at least get
some sort of commitment from our city council,
whether it be an ordinance or a resolution. But you
have to understand that the transportation
planning division of the planning department has
grown to encompass an area-wide transportation
planning designation by the governor. And if
you're a transportation planner, you'll
understand that it means the Metropolitan
Planning Organization. That designation
entails certain responsibilities to carry out
transportation plans for all the local
governments contained within our urbanized
area, which is the city of Portland, the city of
Corpus Christi, the county of San Patricio, and
Nueces County. In order to maintain that
designation and eligibility to continue
receiving transportation funds, we have to
annually update our transportation plan and take
it back before a policy advisory group, which
consists of elected officials, to approve. That
in itself entails a commitment to do certain
things. And because the Metropolitan Planning
Organization, which I'm in charge of, includes
other governments, It leaves our own
administration no choice but to follow for the
most part my recommendations on moving forward
with approval of some kind of planning document.
And we have in my transportation program that I put
together, I'm talking about the planning program
that I put together, I always include two major
elements and those elements have to do with the
other elements of a transportation plan, of a
comprehensive plan, socioeconomic work, land
use, utilities, et cetera, because
transportation plans are not effective unless
they're developed and consistent with the other
planning elements and that realization. In
addition, the fact that because money is becoming
so short, scarce, I should say, the utilization of
that money in the most efficient manner It's
extremely critical to continue to allow this city
to grow in an orderly fashion. And I believe people
have come to realize that an understanding what's
going to happen five years from now, ten years from
now, is necessary in order to allocate those funds
for those kinds of improvements. A major street
that we want to put in, which is the extension,
major highways, extension of a freeway facility,
once it begins from the planning stage, until its
final construction could take as much as 20 years.
And unfortunately, what happens there in the
interim could be disastrous. But until we move
now, we know that that facility, the sooner we
start, the better off we are. The same is true for
understanding what our growth patterns are and
what our sewer needs are going to be, our drainage
needs are going to be, our water needs are going to
be. We've got to start now to start putting these
things to the ground. I think the management has a
realization that information is very critical.
And I think that we'll see eventually not only what
I consider a sort of an unofficial approval of what
we're doing as far as long-range or as
comprehensive planning or development
planning, but we may ultimately even see an
official approval of some sort of comprehensive
document, which has taken us so many years to move
towards that. And I've been here 10 years.
What I tried to move you through was the, is that
recording right now? What I tried to move you
through, I tried to pick you up and give you an idea
of how, from the management point of view, they
perceived what a comprehensive plan was and how
we've had to deal with it, basically, The zoning
ordinance was looked upon as our plan, and
comprehensive plans were really good for looking
at and dreaming about and nothing that they could
actually, that the council or the city management
wanted to work with. From that point of view to
where we're beginning to transition to a wider
acceptance of the need for long-range planning,
if we have to change the name of it, to something
that's more acceptable, we'll do that as long as
the end results are the same. It really doesn't
matter to me. This also reinforces the fact that
changes, particularly if they're going to be
good, in my opinion, have to occur slowly,
particularly in this community. This city has
been very anti-change for the most part. And now,
over the last three years, it's extremely
pro-development. And I think that new concept of
progress is having influences working its way
back into our own work programs, our own efforts.
One of the things we anticipate is an accelerated
growth across this area. We think that the city of
Houston, which we have lost so many people to, that
it's going to be maxing itself out as far as growth
is concerned in the next four to five years. And
that Corpus is sort of like a sleeping bear getting
ready to awake. And it does have a lot of potential
for handling
major growth, both in all areas of the city. It's a
very long city. And of course, in fact, we have a
very aggressive annexation policy recently,
although Corpus Christi also includes all the Bay
Area, and we just recently annexed a major portion
of the island, and I think we intend to move forward
and annex the rest of the Bay Area island up to the
city limits of Port Aransas. And not in the
northwest part of town. We're seeing a tremendous
amount of growth there. We might end up being the
longest city in the state of Texas where it's
going. Michael,
I want to thank you for your valuable insights and
for relating your experiences and your knowledge
of the funding program here in Corpus and also some
very interesting notes on Jonathan Cunningham
and his operations in El Paso through the years.
The procedure now is that this will be taken back to
Texas A&M, and we will have it transcribed in rough
draft form by the people at Archives. And then this
will be mailed back to you for your review and
comment. I may go through it initially and make
some obvious red line marks on it for grammar and
whatnot, or repetitions. And then I'll send it
down to you for your markup.
simulate additions or deletions depending upon
how you look at it at that time. And then it'll be
final typed after that. And I also want to thank you
for your offer, very generous offer of
stenographic work for final typing. We may very
well be able to accept that. Well, we should be able
to do some of it for you, at least different
sections, anything to keep the project moving. I
appreciate the opportunity of being able to speak
with you. And I think it's a valuable document
that's going to really serve a great purpose as far
as bringing people up to date to where planning has
been and where it's going in the state of Texas.
Thank you.